---
templateKey: blog-post
title: I AM SORRY
date: 2024-10-02T01:18:31.259Z
description: Sometimes we do, say, or think things we shouldn't have.  Saying,
  "I am sorry", is not difficult to do.
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/sop-sax.jpeg
tags:
  - MatureMusician
  - KennyG
---
Have you ever said, done, or thought something that you wish you could take back or give an apology?

I will use this blog to apologize to Kenny G.  I know he will never see this, nor was he ever affected by what I have said, but, I still need to apologize.

The time I spent in college was a time of quick learning, a lot of trumpet playing, and too many opinions given by me.  I was never the party animal or crazy guy everyone wanted to hang out with.  I was a bit opinionated and cocky at times, but, I had good friends that would guide me away from my cockiness and tendency to blurt my unasked opinions.

I remember a friend’s statement that I completely disagreed with and rebutted with my opinion.

His opinion:  I don’t listen to Chicago or like their music.  The horn parts are too easy.

My rebuttal:  What?  Their parts are not too easy.  They make it sound easy, and that is why they are incredible!

I had been practicing a few Chicago tunes and loved practicing to make myself sound as close to Lee Loughnane’s as I could.  I still practice playing Chicago tunes and try to sound as close to Lee Loughnane’s sound.

Trying to sound like Lee Loughnane is not my ultimate trumpet goal.  It is my goal to produce a sound as close to his as I can while playing music by Chicago.  The reason is simple, that is what the audience remembers from the recordings.  For example, the trumpet solo on Does Anybody Really Know What Time It Is cannot be played any other way.  However, after the run goes up, he, at times, changes a few notes.  But, after the piano plays the mixed meter section and the horns come back in with the long notes, everyone knows what the next part will be the trumpet solo.  If I were to come in with a solo that sounds amazing, and incredible, and would make the jazz masters nod their heads in approval, it would mean nothing if the audience didn’t get it.  

I am not saying that the musician must bow to the wants of the listeners.  If that were the case, then music would be as wishy-washy as…well, never mind.

What I am saying is, when something has been established and still excites and enhances performance, why would I wish to change it?  I don’t have the desire to be known as the person pushing the boundaries to the point of people not wanting to listen to music for no other reason than to listen to music.

I am quite sure musicians listen to Chicago and complain about the lack of improvisation or the simplicity of the solo parts.  That is okay.  That is one of the beautiful things about music.  We all perform for different reasons.

This brings me back to Kenny G.

I remember when Pat Metheny blasted Kenny G.  I remember pompously pontificating my words of dislike about Kenny G to some of my students and fellow musicians.  However, I had never listened to Kenny G.  I had heard his tune Songbird, over and over and over and over again on the radio.  I didn’t think it was a bad tune, however, the radio stations must have taken stock in the sales of soprano saxophones and wanted all beginning instrumentalist to play the instrument of their investment.

Instead of changing the station when the tune came on, I would let it play and grumble about how many times they played the tune.  It wasn’t that I didn’t like the tune, It wasn’t that I didn’t listen to tunes I liked on repeat, It wasn’t that I didn’t have the opportunity to turn the channel or turn the radio off, instead, I chose to let the media bother me.

In the same way, I chose to tell my students and musician friends how Kenny G wasn’t a jazz musician, I had chosen to let an outside source influence me and had refused to listen and make an educated decision for myself.  I had no right or reason to make, what I thought was, my opinion heard and try to convince others that I was right about Kenny G.  

Compared to many that I gig with, I greatly lack in improvisation skills.  Lacking in skills doesn’t necessarily mean that I instantly enjoy listening to those who have better skills than I do.  Even if I had superior skills doesn’t mean anything when it comes to others.  Spewing my opinion about the ability or inability of others gains nothing in the goal of helping others.

Let me take a step back here and say that there are times when opinions are asked and can be shared.  For example, in adjudicating or auditions.  Opinions are important and necessary.  Opinions should be given in a way that will help and encourage those they are given to and are given about.

At times, I still give an unasked opinion and if I realize that I had given an unasked opinion or was made aware that it was given, I quickly apologize.  I have recently made it a practice to make my opinions positive and if I am asked to give an opinion, I try to have a solution or methods to a solution if my opinion does not favor the situation.

As I stated before, I know Kenny G couldn’t care less about the opinion of a trumpet-playing guy who is trying to get gigs.  For the handful of those of you who may be reading this, I hope this writing helps us remember when we are playing gigs or are asked about another musician that we are kind with our words.  I hope we encourage one another and even if a person isn’t right for the gig and your opinion is asked, the opinion is given in a way that will be encouraging and will not be used to hurt another person.

When a person gives an ugly opinion about someone, even if that opinion may be true, it makes the person giving the opinion look unfavorable in the eyes of the listeners.  I would much rather give my opinion, when asked, in the presence of all it will affect.  That way, I will be sure to encourage, support, and maintain a friendship or at least a positive working relationship with all involved.

So, Kenny G, I apologize.  I sincerely apologize for being arrogant and telling people that I did not like your playing even though I had never listened to you.  

Music is sentimental, therapeutic, and fun.  Music doesn’t make itself.  Music needs musicians, of all kinds, and we need to encourage other musicians to make the sounds that help people forget about life for a while.