---
templateKey: blog-post
title: I'm Late!
date: 2025-08-02T15:04:16.701Z
description: Timing is everything!
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/broken-clock.jpeg
---
I am a day late on posting the blog.  

It feels weird.  

I don’t like being late.

A lot has happened in July; no excuses, just a lot of happenings.

Originally, I was going to title this month’s blog, “Use Your Powers for Good.”  I will touch on the concept a little in this blog, but it will not be the main topic.

Being on time, well, the concept of being early is being on time, has been preached from the mountaintops.  However, a lot of people in leadership positions use that saying and concept as a way to manipulate employees to get to work earlier, but will not allow them the opportunity to start the process of closing up before quitting time because “We work from bell to bell!” is touted by the powerful supervisors.

Recently, I have begun working at a major theme park in Florida.  Fortunately, management understands the concept of appropriate starting and ending times.  The Team Members are trained to begin closing up at times that will allow them to clock out at their scheduled time.  Now, we all know that we are at the mercy of the guests; however, the supervisors, with guest satisfaction as a top priority, will make sure the Team Members can complete their tasks without feeling rushed and clock out at their appointed time.

It may appear that we have taken a side road and have driven away from the original intent of my blog.  

Music.

Hang with me here, I am about to make a transition, albeit a little awkward, but a transition.

I have arrived a gigs a few minutes late, a few times.  Rarely, but a few times.  No excuses, but there were legitimate reasons.

Typically, I will arrive at a gig 45 minutes to 1 hour and 15 minutes early.  Even if I know I cannot get onto the stage and set up at that time, I will show up, stow my stuff backstage or in the green room, and begin warming up.  After a 20-30 minute warm-up, I am ready to go for the gig.  Once I am warmed up, I will check out the venue and relax.  A textbook case of arriving early is arriving on time.  When it is time for the downbeat, I am warmed up, relaxed, and ready to entertain.

The concept of time, with musicians especially, is of utmost importance.

We subdivide while playing a piece of music so that we will not come in late or too early for an entrance.  If we are not aware of time, we will ruin the piece of music for the entire ensemble.

Pssssst….Piano players….rubato is not a time signature.

Sorry, I remember one of my professors saying that joke in college, and I had to share.

While teaching lessons, sectionals, or entire ensembles, I will repeat the phrase, “Right notes, at the right time, and in the right way.”  It sounds simple, and it is a simple concept, but it helps simplify the complexities of music performance.

When we play in ensembles, we are a part of a team.  We rely on one another to play the right notes, at the right time, and in the right way, so that particular music is performed in the way it was created.

Be sure to practice with a metronome.  Practice playing in time.  The more someone practices with a metronome and solidifies the timing internally, the easier it is for them to begin implementing expressions in the music.

Along with, “Right notes, at the right time, and in the right way,” I have recently began telling students that are not playing with as much confidence that I know they have, “The more you play your instrument and the music, the more familiar you become with it, and then when you become familiar, you become confident.”

With the realization of our newfound confidence, we begin to realize that we have a power that is not found in acedemic settings.  We have the power to stir, evoke, and encourage emotions or feelings.  However, we should always use our power for good and never use our power to manipulate emotions.

Now, as I close up this month's short blog, I need to begin my routine of getting ready to leave for my theme park job.  I enjoy getting there a little early so that I can converse with other Team Members and learn as much as I can from their experience.

One day, when the timing is right, I will be playing my trumpet at the theme park and everyone will be able to hear me play the Right notes, at the right time, and in the right way.”