---
templateKey: blog-post
title: Subbing
date: 2025-04-01T15:34:25.777Z
description: Subbing in a band or being a sub at school has challenges and rewards.
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/submarine.jpeg
tags:
  - LeadTrumpet
  - Bandleader
  - ""
---
April 2025

I enjoy being a sub.

One of the primary reasons I practice sight-reading is the potential to get a last-minute call to sub in a band.  

Dear students,

Yes, you can and should practice sight-reading.

It will make you a better musician and get you more calls when the word gets out that you have good sight-reading chops.

Sincerely,

Me

That is my Public Service Announcement to all students who think sight-reading is torturous.

As a sub, I have had the opportunity to play in concert, jazz, rock, funk, soul, and combo bands.  Occasionally, I have been called up to play in a chamber group as well as some solo work.  

I enjoy subbing, however, the stability of playing in a group consistently is something many musicians desire.

Fortunately, I have been able to play in a few groups consistently.  Unfortunately, I have to drive 1 1/2 hours to get to rehearsals and gigs.  Honestly, though, the drive is not bad at all.  I get to drive over water, see incredible sunrises and sunsets, and have the ability to practice the music in my mind before rehearsals.

I understand that subbing isn’t for everyone.  I also understand that there are different types of subbing that aren’t appealing either.

Have you ever seen the excitement, joy, and devilish glee that appear in students' eyes when they arrive at a school classroom and discover they have a substitute teacher?  In my observations, students typically align in one of three categories when a substitute teacher is present.

1. The troublemakers begin to formulate ways to torture the sub.
2. The studious students become a bit sulky because they will not be learning anything new that day.
3. The compliant students will shrug their shoulders and comply with the directions the regular classroom teacher left with the sub.

Depending on the subject, I was a combination of categories 2 and 3.  I was a bit studious yet compliant.  I went with the flow but was never disruptive.  

I never understood why students would try to cause issues in a classroom.  I understand the desire to have people laugh and be the center of attention at times, but receiving the title of “troublemaker” never appealed to me.

Subbing in a classroom is a lot different than subbing in a band.  

In a classroom, a sub is typically seen as someone who is just a placeholder.  Someone who isn’t there to teach but to babysit.  At least that is how it is seen by a lot of students.

In a band, a sub is typically seen as someone who is there to enhance the band.  They are a vital part of the musical group and are expected to perform as a professional and as if they have been a part of the group from the birth of the band.

Sometimes, the troublemaker moniker is given to a sub.  The troublemaker sub in the classroom is someone who doesn’t follow the plans left by the teacher, allows the students to do whatever they desire, or tries to be the “cool sub” and tell, usually fictional, stories about their life and adventures.  Once the regular classroom teacher returns and realizes that the sub didn’t comply with their instructions, there is a good chance that the sub would not be called to sub again.

The troublemaker sub in a musical group will receive the same chance of being on the no-call list if they are seen as a troublemaker.  A troublemaker music sub will typically exhibit characteristics of someone who may be a good musician, but not a good bandmate.  They can be placed on the shunned list by not following the directions left by the composer.  Not following the roadmap (repeats, dynamics, musical feel, etc).  They may tell stories of amazing, and often unbelievable, playing opportunities they have experienced.  They seem to forget that some of the people in the band may have played the gig that they are claiming they played.  Once the members get together and have a small discussion, there is a good chance that they didn’t remember that person at the gig.

There are times that a person may not be deemed a troublemaker but more of a nuisance.  They may not be a nuisance to all, however, they may be thought of as a nuisance to an individual or section.

Recently, I have received the nuisance label.

Placing a label on someone is a great way of telling that person that they are not seen as a person, they are seen through a filtered lens.  To me, labels are different than job titles or duties.  A boss, band leader, and section leader are titles given to someone that do specific duties and leads others.

I was crowned with the “nuisance label” because I was “Playing so loudly that I was splitting eardrums.”

When the volume of my lead playing was brought to my attention by the band leader, they suggested that I redirect my sound.  So, at the next rehearsal, I aimed my trumpet bell below my stand and away from others.  At times, my bell was directed at my music stand.  Since the sound of the trumpet is directional, I was able to keep my sound from creating displeasure.  It is not my desire to be a nuisance, so I complied with the request of the band leader.

The next day, I received a phone call from the band leader stating that I was too loud and needed to fix the situation or people in the band would quit.  After asking what they suggest, I was told, “Take things down an octave, play everything soft, or put a mute in my horn.”

Quite a bit of my book is written with my notes an octave higher than the rest of the trumpet section.  So, with a concert 2 days away, I made a decision.  While playing the concert, I played everything at a mezzo forte or softer, anything written higher than the note, “G” that sits on top of the staff, I played down an octave, and anything unison or I played in octaves with the rest of the trumpet section, I didn’t play.  

At that concert, I didn’t play or played very few notes on 5 charts.  Many times, one or two other trumpet players would lay out if the lines were unison licks.  As I sat, I observed.  Individuals who had an issue with the volume would cover their ears, shake their heads, and say something to one another.  With half of the trumpet section not playing, they still had an issue with the volume.

After the concert, the band leader told the band that they thought everything went well, the volume was great, and it was a great show.

Then, I got a call the next day.

“What part about playing softer don’t you get?”  Was the statement made to me when I answered the phone.

I would say it was a question, but it wasn’t phrased as a question.

Ladies and gentlemen.  Please let me take this time to inform you that I did not get upset, yell, or throw a fit like those who complained about the volume.

I simply told the band leader to stop.  Once they stopped and listened, they heard me say, “After the concert, you said it was great and the volume was great.  Now, you said you have gotten emails from the band members still complaining about the volume.  I don’t envy your position.  You are trying to make everyone happy, and you won’t.  But, I will tell you something, I didn’t play on 5 tunes last night.  Actually, other trumpet players laid out on unison licks.  While I sat, I watched the people who complained about the volume cover their ears and shake their heads.  They did that after they lowered their instruments, and the trumpets were not even playing.  So, you asked me to play softer and take things down an octave, I did that, and they are still not satisfied.  We are doing the composers and the music an injustice by not playing it as it was intended.”

Needless to say, the band leader moved me over to the other side of the band, and I have kept my volume and range down.  Other members of the band have complained that the lead part is missing.

Were there times that I was playing too loud?

Yup.  Sometimes that happens.

Did I respond by following the directions of the band leader and lowering my volume?

Yup.  They are the band leader for a reason.  They lead the band.  I follow their direction.

Am I playing super soft and doing it out of spite?

No.  I have been playing no more than mezzo forte, and that is at the insistence of the band leader.

Are the people complaining about the volume still complaining?

Kinda sorta.  I have noticed that the volume isn’t the only thing they complain about.

Some of the other band members have expressed their desire for me to play my book as it is written.  They want the lead book to be played.  You see, they don’t need me to “lead them” per se, but they need that lead sound so they can fit their parts into the tune.  When the lead player lays a figure back, emphasizes an articulation, or creates a dynamic swell, the rest of the band reacts, and it creates a feel for the tune.  Each member is an amazing musician and can do all of the laying back, articulations, and dynamics on their own, but when there is an example that they can fit into, it creates a sound that is uniform and fun.

I try to keep my blogs positive and somewhat upbeat.  I hope that this particular writing does not come off as negative.  My desire is that young musicians read these words and realize that there is a chain of command and many times (almost always) we need to set our egos aside and follow directions.  It is better to follow the directions and then adapt when those in charge decide that they need you to change back a little to the way it was.

Music is something that everyone in the world enjoys.  Some of us get the honor to create it through instruments, voice, and composition.  We get to experience music on a different level than the consumers.  It is up to us to make it a pleasant experience for others.  Even when you do not agree with the way others think it should be presented.

Being a professional doesn’t mean that you are always right.  

Being a professional is not a label given as a symbol of entitlement.

Being a professional means that you are a person who performs at a high level, able to accept instructions, and willing to accept criticism gracefully.